PETER COYOTE: In July of 1929,
a 90-year-old woman returned
to the Yosemite Valley
in California.
She was called Maria Lebrado,
but 78 years earlier as
a young girl, she had been known
by her real name To-tu-ya,
the granddaughter
of Chief Tenaya, leader
of the Ahwahneechees,
an Indian tribe who
for centuries had called
the valley their home until
in 1851 a battalion of white
men had driven them out
at bayonet point.
To-tu-ya was the sole
remaining survivor
of that sad moment.
This was her first time back.
Half a generation after the
Ahwahneechees' expulsion,
the federal government had
preserved the beautiful valley
permanently as
a national park.
Still, everywhere she looked,
To-tu-ya was reminded of how
much things had changed.
In a broken mixture of
English, Spanish, and her own
ancient language, she told her
escorts the valley floor was
now more wooded and
brushy than in her day.
Her people had regularly
set grass fires to keep
the meadows open and the
trees and shrubs at bay.
Then she looked up at the
rock walls of the valley.
The great monoliths
and majestic waterfalls
stood unchanged.
Turning toward Half Dome,
the cleft rock she knew as
Tis-sa-ack, she stretched out
her arms and raised her voice
in a strong, clear,
high-pitched call that echoed
off the granite walls.
It was, she explained,
the call her
grandfather Tenaya had
once used to summon his
people together.
Until that moment, she had
been the last one to hear it.
[Woman calling]
WOMAN: They're
islands of hope.
The parks are always where
I can go home again.
I go back to my hometown,
there is a Safeway where I
used to play with
Sylvia Gonzalez, they have taken
and turned my old school
into a junk shop,
but the parks don't do that.
So these are places we
can always go home
and paradoxically that we can
always see into the future
and hope for the
better things.
MAN: When we look at parks and
we look at the United States
and we examine the whole idea
of democracy, I think that
the park experience
is an exploration
of the idea of freedom.
Where do I come from,
where am I going,
how did I get here, how did
we as a people get here?
I think that when people go
to a national park, they
get a sense,
a compass to history.
COYOTE: As the 1920s ended,
the United States was about to
enter two of the darkest
and most frightening decades
of the 20th Century, ones
that included an economic
catastrophe that threatened
the foundation of American
society, followed by a war
that threatened the existence
of freedom throughout
the world.
For a time during those dark
years, the national parks
would thrive as never before.
In the 1930s and 1940s,
hundreds of thousands
of American boys would go
to the parks in pursuit
of a paycheck and discover
a new sense of dignity.
Then hundreds of thousands
more under different
circumstances would enjoy in
the parks a moment of peace.
And what happens in the United
States is that the American
land comes to embody
the American nation,
and the national parks become
the icons of our nationalism,
the place where we come to
celebrate what it means
to be an American.
COYOTE: The national park
idea was changing, too.
Though the park service had
lost its charismatic first
director Stephen Mather,
a new president and his
progressive administration
would vastly expand the number
of parks and then even more
dramatically expand the very
notion of what a
national park could be.
A young biologist would insist
that the survival of wildlife
is as important as the
preservation of scenery
and that places without
mountains or waterfalls should
be seen as natural wonders,
as well, and in a time when
the future of the country was
most in doubt, the symbols
of her complicated past would
be set aside and cherished
while Americans from every
walk of life and every
possible background would
find in the parks a deeper
connection to their land,
their nation, and themselves.
MAN: My sense is that our
special connection with
the national parks comes from
the fact that we're a nation
of immigrants, we're a nation
of people for whom this is not
home, and the national parks
are what anchor and root us
on this continent.
They are the meaning of
home for many of us.
They're what it means to be
an American and to inhabit
this continent.
It's the end of the immigrant
experience, and they're what
takes you and says,
"Now I am in America."
COYOTE: In April of 1933,
Franklin Delano Roosevelt,
newly sworn in as president,
asked Horace Albright,
the second director of the
National Park Service to come
along with him during a day
trip from Washington to
Virginia's
Blue Ridge Mountains.
MAN AS HORACE ALBRIGHT:
The president got in the front
seat, where there was more
room, and they took
the braces off his legs.
He put a cigarette in
his long cigarette holder,
sat back, and relaxed.
I sat behind him on the
jump seat just a few inches
from his ear.
I had a dream I wanted
to make real.
For years, I had wanted to
get the many national military
parks, battlefields,
and monuments transferred out
of the War Department and
Department of Agriculture into
the National Park Service.
As we approached the
Rappahannock River, I began
thinking, "If I'm going
to talk to the president
"about getting
the military parks,
"I had better get to it."
Now was the time.
COYOTE: Albright began
pointing out sites important
to the Second Battle of
Bull Run in the Civil War,
then broadened the discussion
to myriad other battlefields
and historic sites
in the area.
WOMAN: So my father had
a golden opportunity.
He told him exactly
what he wanted.
He wanted the monuments,
and he wanted
the battlefields.
"All right."
When they got back
to the White House,
"Hey, Albright," he said.
"Tomorrow morning, I want
a plan in my office.
"I want to know what
you want to do."
FRANKLIN ROOSEVELT: And to
the formal duties of the
Park Service by transferring
from other departments many
other parks,
battlefields, memorials,
and national monuments.
COYOTE: Within days, Roosevelt
would sign two executive
orders initiating a sweeping
reorganization that overnight
transformed the Park Service.
From the War Department,
the agency was given
responsibility for more than
20 military parks and historic
battlefields and monuments:
from Castillo de san Marcos,
an ancient Spanish fort
in St. Augustine, Florida,
to Yorktown, Virginia,
where the decisive victory
of the American Revolution
had been won; From Antietam,
where the bloodiest battle
of the Civil War was fought,
to Appomattox Courthouse,
where it ended.
Under the new plan, the Park
Service was now expected to
protect and interpret more
than a dozen nonmilitary
historic sites, as well:
The Statue of Liberty in
New York's Harbor;
Mount Rushmore in South Dakota;
and many
of the District of Columbia's
most hallowed places,
including the Lincoln Memorial,
the shrine to
the president who in 1864 had
given the national park
idea its first
tentative expression.
National parks now embraced
the idea of America itself.
MAN: Our national heritage
is richer than just
scenic features.
The realization is coming that
perhaps our greatest national
heritage is nature itself with
all its complexity and its
abundance of life.
George Melendez Wright.
COYOTE: During To-tu-ya's
emotional return to Yosemite,
one of her escorts, chosen
because he was fluent
in Spanish, was a young Park
Service employee named
George Melendez Wright.
He had been born into a
wealthy San Francisco family.
His mother came from one of
El Salvador's most
prominent dynasties.
His father was a ship captain.
When they both died
prematurely, he was raised by
an aunt, who encouraged his
fascination with the natural
world, which led to
a degree in zoology.
Working in Yosemite as an
assistant park naturalist,
Wright became convinced that
the parks were fulfilling only
part of their purpose.
By focusing so much on
attracting visitors,
park managers had overlooked
another responsibility,
which Wright called "the very
heart of the National Park
"System," preserving wildlife
in its natural state.
MAN AS GEORGE MELENDEZ WRIGHT:
When a tourist enters the
park, he is looking for the
same concentration of animals
he saw in the paddocks of
the zoological garden.
A galaxy of bears at our
garbage platform approximates
this concept, and
he is satisfied.
Then comes a day when
his heart skips a beat.
Walking along a deep forest
trail, he comes upon a single
bear eagerly peeling the bark
from a log in search
of fat white grubs.
This is a fresh thrill, and
it brings the realization that
the unique charm of the
animals in a national park
lies in their wildness,
not their tameness, in their
primitive struggle to survive,
rather than their fat
certainty of an easy living.
COYOTE: Though only in his
mid-20s and near the bottom
of the Park Service career
ladder, Wright proposed to his
superiors that he undertake
something that had never been
done before, a scientific
survey of wildlife conditions
in the parks.
It took a year of persuasion,
but he finally won approval
for his plan, partly
because of his persistence
and friendly personality and
also because the financially
independent Wright offered
to pay for the whole
thing himself.
In the summer of 1930 in
a Buick Roadster he had
purchased and customized to
carry camping gear, cameras,
and scientific instruments,
Wright set off with two
colleagues on an 11,000-mile
tour of the western parks.
They would keep at it for
4 consecutive years.
At each park, Wright kept
a daily log
of the animals he saw.
He also gathered information
from his conversations
with people in the field,
park rangers
and superintendents,
local rangers and hunters,
old-timers who remembered
what it was like back
in the 19th Century,
anyone with information
about the state of wildlife in
the parks, to augment what he
and his fellow
researchers were observing
with their own eyes.
Everywhere he went, Wright
discovered disturbing evidence
that the equilibrium of
nature was out of kilter.
Coyotes, wolves, and mountain
lions, even badgers and hawks
and owls were routinely
shot as unwelcome predators.
Buffalo were kept in
corrals like domestic cows.
Elk, deer, and antelope
were being fed hay
in the wintertime.
At Yellowstone, he learned
that rangers had been ordered
to go to the nesting grounds
of white pelicans and stomp
their eggs because it was
feared that grown pelicans
deprived anglers of
too many fish.
The bears meanwhile were
treated like pets, fed scraps
of food at staged events
each evening near the parks'
garbage dumps or along the
roadsides, where they were
encouraged to beg for
handouts from tourists.
MAN AS GEORGE MELENDEZ WRIGHT:
The average citizen expects
more intelligence from a
bear than he has any
right to expect.
He goes on the assumption that
if he feeds a bear two sticks
of candy and does not want
to give it a third he is
the one to say,
"No, no," and he believes that
the bear is to be accused
of an unforgivable breach
of etiquette if it takes all
the candy out of his hand
and perhaps takes
the hand with it.
COYOTE: Wright eventually
published two reports
proposing a
radically new policy.
Unless threatened with
extinction within in a park,
each native species, including
the hated predators, he wrote,
"should be left to carry
on its struggle
"for existence unaided."
MAN: When he said that "the
rare predators shall be
"protected in the national parks
"in proportion that they are
persecuted everywhere else,"
that was--that
was revolutionary.
COYOTE: Wright also called for
the end of winter feedings,
closing the bear dumps,
no more stocking streams
with nonnative fish, expansion
of some park boundaries to
accommodate grazing habits
and changes in a multitude
of practices that
had become ingrained.
Most park managers
were unconvinced,
but Horace Albright, intrigued
by the surveys, established
a new Wildlife Division in 1933
and named
George Melendez Wright,
only 29 years old,
as its chief.
MAN AS GEORGE MELENDEZ WRIGHT:
If we destroy nature blindly,
it is a boomerang which
will be our undoing.
Consecration to the task of
adjusting ourselves to the
natural environment so that
we secure the best values from
nature without destroying
it is not useless idealism.
It is good hygiene
for civilization.
MAN: Part of the changing
relationship with national
parks as we evolved as
a nation went
from scenery to science.
The scenery was obvious.
It was overwhelming,
it was stunning.
The science is not so obvious.
Science embraces mystery,
and it begins to look into
the future in ways that most
people can't preserve.
It asks questions that most
people don't ask, and it says,
"We need to hold on to these
places, and I can't give you
"precise reason why, but the
reason will come along later,
"and if we don't have them,
we'll never be able to explore
"the answers to the
questions we'll be asking."
So they hold the answers to
questions we have not even
yet learned to ask.
[Frogs croaking]
WOMAN: I think it's the people
that pressure the government
to do the things
that benefit them.
I don't think most politicians
sit there and say, "Now what's
"the best thing I can do
for the people today?"
But they hear from their
constituents, and that's what
makes up their minds,
and the people really
love their parks.
They mean a lot.
There's an emotional
bond there, and they'll
fight for them.
WOMAN: There are no other
Everglades in the world.
Nothing anywhere else
is like them.
Their vast, glittering
openness wider than
the enormous visible round of
the horizon, the sweetness
of their massive winds
under the dazzling blue
heights of space.
The miracle of the light
pours over the green and brown
expanse of saw grass and
water, shining and slow-moving
below, the grass and water
that is the meaning central
face of the
Everglades of Florida.
It is a river of grass.
Marjory Stoneman Douglas.
COYOTE: For centuries,
the fresh waters of Lake
Okeechobee had flowed slowly
and yet unimpeded across
a vast swath of southern
Florida toward the Gulf
of Mexico, a seemingly endless
saw grass marsh punctuated by
cypress swamps and mangrove
forests, creating
an environment unlike
anything else on earth.
Its highest elevation is never
more than a few feet above sea
level, yet its rich landscape
supports more than a thousand
different species of plants
from royal palms
and smooth-barked
gumbo limbo trees
to delicate orchids
and bromeliads.
It is the only place where
alligators and crocodiles can
be found living side by side,
and it is a critical breeding
ground for wading birds beyond
counting: egrets and ibises
and herons of all sizes,
roseate spoonbills,
and the wood stork, the only
stork native to America.
GREENE: It's magnificent when
you stand there and look out
on the vastness of it all.
Well, they call it a swamp,
but it's really not a swamp
because the water moves ever
so slowly, but it moves.
COYOTE: Because of its
trackless impenetrability,
the Everglades became
something of a sanctuary
for people, too.
In the 1800s when the Seminole
Indians were driven out
of Florida, small groups
escaped and found refuge deep
in the cypress trees
and saw grass along
with the Miccosukee Tribe and
hundreds of runaway slaves.
Later when the fashion in
women's hats made the white
feathers of egrets more
valuable per ounce than gold,
plume hunters and poachers
hid out in the Everglades
and slaughtered the birds
there with impunity.
A few game wardens who dared
try to stop them were killed,
too, but a greater threat soon
imperiled not just the birds
but the Everglades itself.
Napoleon Bonaparte Broward,
elected governor on a slogan
of "Drain the Everglades" was
merely one in a long series
of Florida politicians and
promoters who built their
careers on the idea of turning
the vast wetland into
a developer's promised land.
They had divided up the
Everglades into lots that they
were selling to the
suckers from up north.
They were selling land
by the gallon.
COYOTE: As mechanized dredges
began digging drainage canals,
real estate speculators
began offering land
at $1.00 an acre,
then $20, then $50,
even though some of it
was still underwater.
A succession of real estate
booms swept south Florida.
Much of the northern
Everglades was turned into
sugar cane plantations,
vegetable fields,
and cattle ranches.
The towns sprouting up along
the coastline began taking
more and more land in
the interior as their
populations swelled.
Then in the late 1920s in the
Miami area, a small movement
began, hoping to save as
much of the remaining
Everglades as possible.
The Florida Federation of
Women's Clubs had already
preserved a 120-acre parcel
called Royal Palms and given
it to the state.
That wasn't enough for
Ernest Coe, a landscape
architect who had recently moved
from Connecticut to Miami
and was shocked to learn that
rare orchids, exotic birds,
and so much else in the
Everglades were being
systematically destroyed.
He decided to make it his
life's work to create a much
larger national park.
Coe threw himself into the
cause, convening meetings,
firing off petitions,
relentlessly pestering
politicians, and persuading
others to join his crusade.
WOMAN AS DOUGLAS: I can't say
I've spent many years and months
communing with the Everglades.
To be a friend of the
Everglades is not necessarily
to spend time wandering
around out there.
It's too buggy, too wet,
too generally inhospitable.
I suppose you could say the
Everglades and I have the kind
of friendship what
doesn't depend on constant
physical contact.
I know it's out there,
and I know its importance.
Marjory Stoneman Douglas.
COYOTE: Marjory Stoneman
Douglas soon became
the movement's most powerful
public voice, even though,
as she was the first to admit,
she seemed an unlikely
champion of the cause.
She wouldn't voluntarily say,
"Well, let's go have a picnic
in the Everglades," or, "Let's
go boating in the Everglades."
She just wasn't that much
of an outdoor person really,
but she taught people
about the Everglades.
She would go anywhere
anytime to make a speech
about the Everglades.
COYOTE: A graduate of
Wellesley College, Douglas had
come to Florida in 1915 to
get a divorce after a brief
and unhappy marriage,
then enlisted in the Navy
in World War I and served
with the Red Cross in Europe.
"I wanted my own life in
my own way," she said.
She became the "Miami Herald"
society reporter but found
herself more interested in the
struggles for women's rights
and racial justice, earning a
reputation for her feistiness
and colorful writing.
When Ernest Coe turned her
attention to the Everglades,
Douglas quickly agreed
with him that its unique
combination of water,
wildlife, and plants needed
federal protection, but at
the national level, many park
supporters were unsure whether
the Everglades, lacking
dramatic mountains,
waterfalls, or geysers,
was worthy of being
a national park.
"A swamp is a swamp,"
one leading
conservationist said.
The National Park Service has
spent the first 15, 20 years
of its own existence promoting
the West, and suddenly,
the Everglades comes along,
and the National Park Service
says, "But wait a minute.
Where's the scenery?
"Where's the Canyons?
Where's the mountains?
Why are people going
to come here?"
COYOTE: Frederick Law Olmsted
Jr., who like his father had
helped define the national
park idea, was dispatched to
Florida to study the request.
"The quality of the scenery,"
he conceded, "is to
"the casual observer somewhat
confused and monotonous,
"perhaps rather subtle for
the average person in search
"of the spectacular."
Then at the end of a long day,
Olmsted found himself near the
nighttime roost of thousands
of ibises and herons.
MAN AS OLMSTED:
After dusk, flock after
flock came in from their
feeding grounds and settled
in the thickets close at hand.
It was an unforgettable sight
that ranks high among the
natural spectacles of America.
MAN: Somebody can tell you
about a place, and you can nod
your head and say, "Yeah, boy,
that's interesting."
Someone can show you a
photograph or a painting of it
and say, "Man, that's
something," but until you're
actually there, until you're
in the midst of the place,
where all your senses
are involved, that's
the transformative moment,
that's when you say,
"This is a place,
and I am part of it."
COYOTE: Skeptical Park Service
leaders, including
Horace Albright, made a series
of official trips to decide
whether to support the idea.
So did George Melendez Wright,
director of the new
Wildlife Division.
Both found it easier to
conduct at least part of their
investigations from the air,
floating above the Everglades
in the Good Year Blimp.
Both were astonished
by what they saw.
"Unless this area is quickly
established as a national park,"
Wright warned,
"the wildlife there will
"become extinct."
RUNTE: And then
Horace Albright got in a blimp,
went over the Everglades,
looked down, saw the wildlife,
saw the alligators and all the
ibises and all the wonderful
bird life, and said,
"You know, this is a beautiful
"place, and I think this could
be a park," and began to
change his mind.
And in the process
of changing his mind,
it changed
the Park Service's mind.
COYOTE: Finally, Ernest Coe
and Marjory Stoneman Douglas'
efforts paid off.
A bill to create Everglades
National Park passed Congress
by the narrowest of margins.
For the first time in history,
a park had been created solely
for the preservation
of animals and plants
and the environment
that sustains them.
GREENE: It was an enchanted
spot, and to me, that was the
closest thing to heaven on
earth, and I spent almost
every weekend down in the a
little bitty boat cruising
Florida Bay and looking
at the birds.
We didn't fish, we didn't
speed around in a boat.
We just floated around
and felt like we were
all part of it.
Us and the birds.
And the fish that we could
see on the bottom the water
was so clear.
We were just being
there part of it all.
I think that's what a
national park is all about.
It gives people breathing
room, it gives people
a tranquil atmosphere.
It gives them an opportunity
to be a part of nature.
You're just part of it all,
just part of the rest of it.
[Frogs croaking]
ROOSEVELT: Today for the first
time, I have seen Glacier Park.
Perhaps I can best express to
you my thrill and delight by
saying that I wish that every
American, old and young,
could have been with me.
The great mountains,
the glaciers, the lakes,
and the trees make me long
to stay here for all
the rest of the summer.
To say from standpoint
of scenery alone that--
MEN, SINGING: Where seldom
is heard a discouraging word
And the skies are
not cloudy all day
COYOTE: In Franklin Delano
Roosevelt, the national parks
had found their greatest
friend in the White House
since the presidency of his
cousin Theodore Roosevelt
a generation earlier.
F.D.R. had developed his own
deep love of the outdoors
during his boyhood on
his wealthy family's
country estate.
Adding historic sites and
battlefields to the national
parks had been simply a
first step in the larger
reorganization F.D.R. and his
administration contemplated,
but a much bigger issue
demanded his attention.
The Great Depression had
thrown 1 out of every 4
American wage
earners out of work.
Factories shut down, farms
were foreclosed, unemployed
young men, concerned that they
had become a burden to their
families, roamed
the countryside
by the hundreds of thousands.
Many Americans wondered
where their next meal
would come from.
In some cities, animals in
the zoo were shot and the meat
distributed to the poor.
Everyone in the United States
was affected.
MAN: The welfare at that
time was called relief.
It was sad when I found out
the source of that money.
It was from the paupers' fund,
so that was hard to take,
but, hey, it kept us going.
COYOTE: Juan Lujan had grown
up in west Texas near the tiny
town of Redford on
the Rio Grande.
LUJAN: By the time I graduated
from high school, that was
the depth of the Depression,
so that prompted me and my
mother to seek something,
and one of the social workers
advised her about the CCCs.
COYOTE: The TVA, the PWA,
the WPA, the CWA.
Among the alphabet soup of
programs Roosevelt's New Deal
created to stimulate
the economy and combat
unemployment was one
especially dear to
the president's heart because
it incorporated his concern
for conservation.
He had pushed it through
Congress in less than a week
after being inaugurated.
The Civilian Conservation
Corps put young men to work
in national forests, state
parks, and national parks,
clearing brush and replanting
forests, fighting fires,
building visitor shelters
and ranger cabins, improving
campsites and trails.
Horace Albright was part
of the early planning,
and because the Park Service
already had a long list
of projects ready to go,
it was given a lead
role in the new program.
Within 3 months, 1,000 CCC
camps were up and running
with nearly 300,000 young men
at work in them, sending money
back home, helping
millions of Americans.
LUJAN: Prior to the CCC,
I didn't know anything
about national parks except
what I read in my history
books, that they
existed somewhere.
I had never been to a
national park before.
COYOTE: Juan Lujan was
dispatched to help develop
what would become Big Bend
National Park in Texas.
LUJAN: We were housed
in barracks,
we ate in a mess hall just
like the military,
and we had a certain
discipline.
We'd get up early in the
morning, do calisthenics.
That was before breakfast,
and you'd better be
at the calisthenics.
Otherwise, KP, kitchen patrol.
COYOTE: For many, it was their
first time away from home
and their first real encounter
with the natural world.
Burton Appleton from Brooklyn
was sent to Glacier National
Park in northwest Montana.
I once visited my brother
in Hackettstown, New Jersey,
which was maybe 50 miles
west of the Hudson River.
I had an aunt who lived
out on Long Island,
Eastport, Long Island.
Maybe that was 50 miles.
I can't remember
visiting anyplace else.
Those are the only two times
that I think I had left
Brooklyn, New York.
We'd been on the train for
about 4 days, and we were
awakened at a stop, and I
looked out the window of my
upper berth, and there was
this mountain with snow
in April, and of course,
in Brooklyn, we had a bluff
maybe in Prospect Park we
could walk up, but nothing
like that in my past.
Another thing I remember is
that I was out there by myself
one day with my Kodak box
camera, and I--to this day,
I don't believe it.
A deer walked up to me
within 10 feet maybe.
I stood stock still.
I couldn't believe that,
and I took a picture, and as
soon as I clicked the camera,
the deer turned tail an ran,
and I have that photo.
COYOTE: Claude Tyler, at age
16 the eldest of 6 boys and
2 girls in a desperately poor
farm family from Blossom,
Texas, was dispatched to the
barren wastes of Death Valley
National Monument.
TYLER: We loaded on a truck
somewheres in that area
and went to Death Valley,
and it was pretty warm then,
but in June, it
really did get hot.
Fifth day of June,
it was 120 in the shade.
270 foot below sea level.
Well, it was hot, and us
boys kind of got toughened
to it, I think.
We all got a good suntan.
COYOTE: Tyler was then sent to
Lassen Volcanic National Park
in northern California,
a peak more than
10,000 feet above sea level.
TYLER: I'd never been to
the mountains before.
It was all new to me.
Kind of short-winded the
first time I went up there.
Ha ha ha!
Get up above the tree line,
why, you get short of breath,
and I would make pictures and
send them home and tell them I
was doing all right and this
is where I'm at, and Mother
would write and say,
"Well, you be careful
on those mountains."
We got paid $30 a month of
which a whole $5.00 was ours.
The rest of it went home,
and $25 a month seems like
nothing, but it made
a big difference.
Money and dignity was
important because whenever you
need a shirt and you buy it,
if you bought it with your own
money, that's a good feeling.
ROOSEVELT: It's very good
to be here at these
Virginia CCC camps.
I wish I could see them
all over the country.
I hope that all over the
country they're in as fine
condition as the camps that
I have seen today.
I wish that I could take a
couple of months off from the
White House and come down here
and live with them because I
know I'd get full of
health the way I have.
LUJAN: We almost
thought he was God.
We really liked him.
Because at the same time,
there were many other programs
having nothing to do with the
CCC, but there was progress,
there was work,
there was money in
the community circulating.
COYOTE: Besides the
conservation work they did,
the men also participated in
organized sports, hobby clubs,
discussion groups, and
classes meant to prepare them
for getting jobs once
they left the camps.
At Big Bend, Juan Lujan helped
lay the foundations for new
park buildings and then,
because he spoke both Spanish
and English fluently,
became a museum guide.
He was also put to
work teaching his
less-educated comrades.
LUJAN: Most of the enrollees
in that particular camp had
not graduated
from high school.
Many of them had little or
no education, and those of us
that had some, we volunteered
to teach classes, and some
of them wanted to learn how
to read and write Spanish.
I taught some
of those, too.
COYOTE: Juan Lujan would go
on to college, something his
mother always wanted him to do,
eventually earn a master's
and then a doctoral degree
and continue teaching others
for the rest of his life.
After his time at Lassen,
Claude Tyler returned
to Blossom, Texas.
TYLER: I went back
to school for a year.
I went over to the school house,
and the teacher wanted
me to go from a--I had only
finished about the fifth
grade, and he looked over
some of the things that I took
in CC camps and correspondence
courses, and he put me
in the first year in high
school, and so I went one year
in high school,
and that's the last
of the education that I had.
It's because my parents
hadn't really got up
on their feet real good.
I went back to CC camps and
stayed two terms in there.
APPLETON: I was not a very
good high-school student.
My grades were not all that
good, and I am convinced to
this day that the only reason
I was able to matriculate
at the New York State College
of Forestry was that I
convinced the registrar or
the dean of admissions of my
experience in the CCC.
That's what the
CCC did for me.
COYOTE: Over the course of
the Depression, more than
3 million men would find work at
one time or another with the
Civilian Conservation Corps.
They would build more than
97,000 miles of fire roads
in national forests, combat
soil erosion on 84 million
acres of farmland, and plant
3 billion trees, more than one
half the total reforestation
accomplished
in the nation's history.
During that time, some
$218 million would be pumped
into projects solely within
the national parks,
including trails and buildings
that remain to this day.
RUNTE: The Depression
is a golden age
because the National Park
Service is a federal agency,
and it's going to get all of
Franklin Delano Roosevelt's
"let's rebuild the
nation" dollars.
And the budgets of the
National Park Service soar,
and as the National Park
Service looks at projects that
could put people to work,
Congress agrees,
and Franklin Delano
Roosevelt agrees,
and the National Park Service
suddenly finds itself swimming
in money relative to what it
had in the 1920s.
ROOSEVELT: We are definitely in
an era of building today,
the best kind of building,
the building
of great public projects
for the benefit of the
public and with the definite
objective of building human
happiness at the same time.
TYLER: Looking back on it now,
I believe that it helped a lot
of families have
a better life.
I realize now that it was for
the benefit of the economy,
too, but I believe that a lot
of families might not have
been able to survive
if it hadn't have been
for that program.
And I got to see a lot of the
world that I wouldn't have
seen before that if I hadn't
have done to the CC camps.
Mount Lassen was
outstanding all right.
Death Valley was just hot.
I don't know whether I'd
call that a favorite memory,
but I can remember it.
[Clattering]
SCHULLERY: The national parks
have always been managed
pretty much by the
values of their time.
It was still spectacle.
Wild beauty was defined on
superficial levels that had
very little to do with
wildness and how wildness
actually works.
Oddly enough, it's the
scientists who had the most to
do with redefining beauty.
MAN AS GEORGE MELENDEZ WRIGHT:
In the end, the National Park
Service either will be praised
for intelligently conserving
the last fragments of
primitive America or condemned
for failure to hold
to the real purpose.
George Melendez Wright.
WOMAN: I think his passion
really shows through
in his writing.
He was very persuasive.
He could convince people who
really were against his ideas,
he could bring them along.
He was a joyous person.
He was very comfortable in
his own skin, not egotistical
but very confident in himself.
He was a small person even
by Hispanic standards
but with a big heart, mind,
and presence.
COYOTE: By 1936, George
Melendez Wright was married
with a growing family,
but he was busier
with is work than ever.
The Wildlife Division he had
started within in the Park
Service now had 27 biologists
promoting Wright's vision that
park policies had to take
the animals and plants into
account, not just
the tourists.
His personal interest in
Yellowstone's trumpeter swans,
the largest and most rare of
American water fowl, which had
been reduced by hunting to
a mere handful of breeding
pairs, had turned into a
personal crusade to save them
from extinction.
Wright solicited the help
of local rod and gun clubs,
lobbied state fish and game
commissions and other federal
agencies, even donated some of
his own money again to create
a special wildlife refuge that
ultimately brought the swans
back from the brink.
MAN AS GEORGE MELENDEZ WRIGHT:
Sometimes while I'm watching
these birds, the illusion of
the untouchability of this
wilderness becomes so strong
that it is stronger than
the reality, and the polished
roadway becomes the illusion,
the mirage that
has no substance.
COYOTE: In February,
the traveled to the newly
authorized Big Bend National
Park in southwest Texas,
where the Chisos Mountains
rise out of the Chihuhuan
Desert and the Rio Grande cuts
through a series of dramatic
canyons separating the
United States from Mexico.
With Roger Toll, another
rising star within the Park
Service, Wright was part of a
two-nation commission studying
the possibility of an
international park straddling
both sides of the border.
His fluency in Spanish and his
outgoing disposition helped
him make friends with
his Mexican counterparts.
After the meeting, he and
Toll headed for home.
Near Deming, New Mexico,
an oncoming car blew a tire
and crashed head-on
into their vehicle.
Both men were killed.
George Melendez Wright was 31.
Without him,
the Park Service's interest
in wildlife waned.
By the end of the decade,
of the 27 biologists who had
once been under his
supervision, only 9 were left.
MAN: Scenery without
wildlife is scenery.
Wildlife is a component
of the grander scene.
Without that wildlife,
you don't have
a national park.
George Melendez Wright was
a savior of wildlife
in America's national parks,
but more importantly,
George Melendez Wright
is a savior
of the national park ideal.
ROOSEVELT: I'm very keen about
travel, not only personally--
you know that--but also travel
for as many Americans as can
possibly afford it because those
Americans will be fulfilling
a very desirable objective of
our citizenship, getting to
know their own country better,
and the more they see of it,
the more they will realize
the privileges which God
and nature have given
to the American people.
COYOTE: Throughout
the Depression,
President Roosevelt made a
number of well-publicized visits
to the national parks, glorying
in the chance to be outdoors
in the midst of such stunning
landscapes, even if the polio
that had destroyed his legs
confined him to the backseat
of his touring car, and he
cheerfully encouraged his
fellow citizens to
follow his example.
ROOSEVELT: I decided today
that every year ought
to be National Parks Year.
There is nothing so American
as our national parks.
The scenery and wildlife are
native, and the fundamental
idea behind the
parks is native.
It is in brief that the
country belongs to the people.
They are not for
the rich alone.
COYOTE: Despite hard times,
the number of park visitors
continued to rise during the
1930s from roughly 3 million
a year at the start of the
decade to 15.5 million
in 1939, and Roosevelt was
intent on setting aside more
places for them to visit.
He turned his attention to
the northwestern corner of
Lake Superior off the coast
of Minnesota and Michigan
and the largest freshwater
island in the world, creating
Isle Royale National Park.
The president also used
his authority under
the Antiquities Act to bypass
Congress altogether and create
a string of national
monuments.
Some of them would eventually
be elevated to park status,
including Joshua Tree in
southern California, named
for the distinctive plants
Mormon pioneers believed
looked in silhouette liked the
Prophet Joshua raising his
arms to beckon them forward.
The Dry Tortugas, a remote
cluster of 7 tiny islands
70 miles off the
southernmost tip of Florida.
On one island sits the
largest brick fortification
in the world, Fort Jefferson,
used during the Civil War
as a prison.
Capitol Reef in Utah, where
a hundred-mile fold
in the earth's crust exposes a
panoply of differently colored
rock formations
the Navajo Indians called
The Land of
the Sleeping Rainbow.
And off the coast of
Santa Barbara,
the Channel Islands,
a crucial breeding ground for
hundreds of animal species,
including the California brown
pelican, whose nesting place
had virtually disappeared
everywhere else in the western
United States, an oasis of
undeveloped land just a few
miles from the explosive urban
growth of greater Los Angeles.
All clear!
ROOSEVELT: We should remember
that the development of our
national park system over a
period of many years has not
been a simple bed of roses.
It has been a long and fierce
fight against many private
interests, which were
entrenched in political
and economic power.
MAN: This is an allocation
out of the total sum...
COYOTE: No one was more
willing to take on entrenched
interests than the president's
irascible Secretary of the
Interior Harold Ickes,
a self-described old curmudgeon.
A Chicago lawyer and former
Republican stalwart known
equally for his explosive
temper and his fierce devotion
to New Deal policies, he had
become one of Roosevelt's
closest and most
controversial advisors.
"The meanest man who ever
sat in a cabinet office
"in Washington,"
Horace Albright said,
"and the best Secretary
of the Interior we ever had."
Ickes fought battles
on every front.
One of his first acts was
to abolish the department's
segregated lunchrooms.
Then he told the national
parks in the South to simply
ignore local Jim Crow laws
requiring separate
facilities for blacks.
At Virginia's Shenandoah
National Park, signs
segregating campgrounds
or picnic areas were
quietly taken down.
Ickes make more enemies by
repeatedly proposing the
creation of a Department of
Conservation that would put
national parks, national
forests, and all other natural
resources under the same
administrative control--his.
Congress repeatedly refused,
but he continued to have
Roosevelt's ear and trust
and was tirelessly effective
in advocating new parks
regardless of the opposition.
In 1937, Roosevelt
and Ickes entered
into a park controversy that
had been raging for 30 years.
On the Olympic Peninsula west
of Seattle, majestic mountains
trapped the moist Pacific
winds, which dropped
160 inches of rain a year,
nurturing verdant rain forests
that contained the largest
specimens in the world
of Douglas fir, red cedar,
western hemlock,
and Sitka spruce.
For centuries, it was the
homeland of native tribes like
the Makah and Quinault,
the Hoh and Skokomish.
Over the years, more than
10 different bills had been
introduced in Congress to
make Mount Olympus National
Monument into a National Park.
Each one was defeated, caught
in a seemingly endless battle
between the Forest Service
and the Park Service.
Meanwhile, loggers were
approaching the last virgin
stands of rain forest.
"Left to the care of the
Forest Service," Harold Ickes
contended, "such places
suffered the same fate as
"a pig in the stockyards.
All that is left," he said,
"is the squeal."
POPE: Harold Ickes was one of
the few Interior Secretaries
of the 20th Century who was as
big as the parks because Ickes
was the first Secretary of the
Interior who really engaged
the fact that you could save
a place once somebody had
aspirations on it.
The early parks were
created before anybody big
and powerful had aspirations,
and when San Francisco,
which was big and powerful,
drew its bead on Hetch Hetchy,
San Francisco won,
Hetch Hetchy lost.
Ickes said, "Wait a minute.
"Big, powerful people may
have their aspirations
"on the Olympics,
but they don't have to win."
COYOTE: The president decided
to have a look for himself,
but his visit was arranged
by the Forest Service and its
allies in the lumber and pulp
mill industries, all of them
intent on convincing Roosevelt
that a national park would
ruin an already
suffering local economy.
No detail was overlooked.
They excluded all
Park Service officials from
the invitation list, scheduled
a massive logging train to
rumble past the president's
lodge during his breakfast,
a not-so-subtle reminder of
the jobs at stake, and they
moved the sign marking the
National Forest boundary to
give the impression that
a heavily logged area,
now several square miles
of burned stumps, was not
on federal land.
"I hope the son of a bitch
who's responsible for this is
"roasting in hell," Roosevelt
said, not realizing that he
was actually looking at a
national forest and his guide
was the forest supervisor.
When Roosevelt learned
about the deception, it only
increased his commitment
to protect the forest.
On June 29, 1938, with
the president's passionate
support, Congress converted
the National Monument to
Olympic National Park and gave
Roosevelt the authority to
expand its boundaries,
which he soon did, saving two
of the most threatened valleys
by stripping an additional
187,000 acres away from
the Forest Service.
MAN: When the weekend comes
around, I get restless.
At night, I bring maps of
Mount Rainier into bed with me
and fall asleep
looking at them.
When it's time to depart for
a trip, I cannot stay in bed
any longer and get up
before anyone else.
I can't wait to
go hiking again.
Iwao Matsushita.
COYOTE: Among the millions
of people who
took President Roosevelt's
advice to visit national parks
were Iwao Matsushita and his
wife Hanaye, Japanese citizens
who had moved to
Seattle in 1919.
Each Sunday, the Seattle
Camera Club, which he had
helped start, organized
outings to nearby
Mount Rainier National Park,
where Matsushita not only took
still photographs but also
created home movies and kept
a small journal to
record their adventures.
[Projector running]
MAN AS IWAO MATSUSHITA: Beyond
these high valleys, you can
see the craggily white
mountains, whose peaks are
showing through a thick fog.
It is a view worthy of
a sumi-e painting.
Looking to the north, you can
see Mount Rainier appearing
majestically like our king
of mountains Mount Fuji.
I sit on a patch of heather.
I marvel at the speed
with which clouds are
changing their shape.
I crouch by a stream fed by
the remaining snow to enjoy
a cold drink of water
and open up my sushi.
COYOTE: By the mid-1930s,
Iwao and Hanaye had visited
the park more than 100 times,
drawn to the place they called
Holy Mountain.
MAN AS IWAO MATSUSHITA:
Everyone here is having a good
old time, and no one had
a reason to frown.
Like a paradise of our
own world and time.
Looking up, I feel as though
the great snowy mountain were
an affectionate mother to
all the people playing
on her slopes.
COYOTE: Farther to the south,
another Japanese immigrant was
finding similar joy
and inspiration
in another national park.
MAN: Success or failure
is not my aim in life.
Whether I be a flake of
snow or only a drop of dew,
I do not care.
I wish only to paint with
gratitude to nature in my
heart and with
sincerity in my brush.
This is my future,
this is my biography.
Chiura Obata.
COYOTE: Chiura Obata had
arrived in the United States
in 1903 at age 17, a promising
young painter whose original
intention was to stay only
briefly in America before
going on to Paris to continue
his career, but he soon set
down roots in San Francisco,
creating some of the only
on-site sketches of the
destruction wrought by the
Great 1906 Earthquake, making
a name for himself in the bay
area's international art
community, even co-founding
the first Japanese-American
baseball team on the mainland.
Then in 1927, he visited
the high Sierra
and John Muir's Yosemite.
MAN AS CHIURA OBATA: In the
evening, it gets very cold.
The coyotes howl
in the distance.
In the mid-sky,
the moon is arcing.
All the trees are
standing here and there...
[Coyote howls]
and it is very quiet.
[Water running]
You can learn from
the teachings within
this quietness.
Some people teach by speeches,
some by talking, but I think
it is important that you
are taught by silence.
WOMAN: I think for my
grandfather it was not only
that he was able to paint
this landscape, but for him,
it became a spiritual
inspiration, as well, and he
would describe it that this
was "the greatest harvest
"for my whole life and future
in painting," and not only did
he paint for art that he would
bring home but also even just
little postcards.
He sent several postcards back
to his children back home.
One of them reads, "Gyo-chan,
the lovely moon is gone.
"It went to bed early to sleep.
"Grow big and shine more."
COYOTE: For two months, he
and two other artist friends
tramped the high country,
taking in all the park had to
offer, exposing Obata to what
he called "not just shizen,"
or nature, "but dai-shizen,
great nature."
Obata's Yosemite images drew
huge crowds when they were put
on exhibit and rave
reviews from the critics.
"To see our native beauty
spots through the eyes
"of a foreign artist of high
rank," one of them wrote,
"is to find new charm
in our own land."
By the 1930s, Obata had been
asked to join the art faculty
at the University of
California, and every summer,
he and his family would return
to Yosemite, where he gave
lectures, taught outdoor
sketching classes to the
tourists, and made his annual
pilgrimage to a special mountain
spring, whose clear water he
collected for use in making
his paints throughout
the rest of the year.
MAN AS CHIURA OBATA:
I dedicate my paintings first to
the great nature of
California, which has always
given me great lessons,
comfort, and nourishment,
second to the people who share
the same thoughts as though
drawing water from one
river under one tree.
My paintings, created by the
humble brush of a mediocre man,
are nothing but
expressions of my
whole-hearted praise
and gratitude.
COYOTE: By 1940, thanks in
great part to the national
parks they had come
to cherish as their own,
both Chiura Obata
and Iwao Matsushita
had decided
the United States was home,
even if its laws at
the time prohibited them from
becoming citizens because
they had been born in Japan.
When the company he worked
for ordered him back to Tokyo,
Matsushita resigned.
The Depression would make
finding a new job difficult,
but he and Hanaye wanted
to stay close to their
Holy Mountain.
MAN AS IWAO MATSUSHITA:
I enjoy my life in Seattle.
I have so many happy memories
with nice people, both
Japanese and Americans.
I have visited Mount Rainier,
my lover, more than 190 times.
I cannot leave Seattle when I
think of the beautiful views
of Mount Rainier.
Iwao Matsushita.
MAN: Fortunate he is who may
see Mount McKinley against
the summer midnight sky, the
lush fern forests of Kilauea,
the white jubilance
of Yosemite's waters,
and the somber rock and surf
of Acadia National Park.
To record and interpret
these qualities for others,
to brighten the drab moods
of cities, and build high
horizons of the spirit on the
edge of plain and desert,
these are some of the
many obligations of art.
Ansel Adams.
COYOTE: In 1938, a book
arrived at Harold Ickes'
office, entitled "Sierra
Nevada: the John Muir Trail."
It was filled with stunning
images of the mountainous
Kings River Canyon region of
the southern Sierra, captured
by an aspiring photographer
named Ansel Adams.
This was his first book of
landscapes, and since he knew
that Ickes was interested in
making the area a national
park, Adams had sent it along
with his personal compliments.
Ickes took it to the
White House to show
President Roosevelt, who
liked it so much he quickly
appropriated it for his own.
Ansel Adams was on his way to
becoming the most influential
photographer for the cause of
national parks since
William Henry Jackson's images
of Yellowstone had helped
persuade Congress to
create the world's
first park in 1872.
There is this unending
argument about whether art can
affect human affairs, and
I think Ansel is one great
example of how it did.
Muir is another example.
Muir's writings absolutely
had effect, and it wasn't just
propaganda writings.
It was his evocative
descriptive writings
of the Sierras.
Same with Ansel.
Ansel used his photographs in
this movement and used them
very effectively.
COYOTE: The sensitive only
child of a patrician
San Francisco family, Adams
had first encountered nature
during a family
trip to Yosemite.
There, seeing the
waterfalls and the rock faces,
El Capitan,
The Three Brothers, Half Dome,
he was transfixed.
"We should not casually pass
them," Adams wrote later,
"for they are the very heart
of the earth speaking to us."
"I knew my destiny," he added,
"when I first
experienced Yosemite."
In the 1920s when he made
two pack trips into the
Kings Canyon Country, it ignited
in him the conviction that
the place was just as
inspirationally spectacular as
Yosemite and equally deserving
of federal protection.
It was an old dream.
John Muir had fought for
it and failed in the 1890s.
Then Stephen Mather had
taken up the cause
with the same result.
Now Adams and the Sierra Club
believed they had an ally who
shared the dream and had the
power to make it come true--
Secretary of the
Interior Harold Ickes.
"If I had my way about
national parks," Ickes said,
"I would create one without a
road in it, a place where man
"would not try to
improve upon God."
Ickes saw in Kings Canyon
his chance to create a new
kind of park,
a wilderness park in which
roads, hotels, and other large
developments would be banned.
He thought it should be called
the John Muir Kings Canyon
Wilderness Park, and he threw
himself into the fight against
the forces that instead wanted
dams, irrigation projects,
grazing, timber harvesting,
and elaborate tourist resorts.
Through a series of shrewd
maneuvers, he turned one
private interest group against
the other, waged ceaseless
battle against the Forest
Service's efforts to retain
control over the land,
and persuaded most
of the major conservation
groups not to abandon their
support because of
the compromises he felt
he had to make.
"Ickes was," one opponent
of the park said,
"overambitious, egocentric,
ruthless, unethical,
"and highly effective."
In the final moments before
the vote in Congress, the name
was simplified,
dropping any reference
to John Muir and wilderness.
On March 4, 1940, President
Roosevelt signed the law
creating Kings Canyon
National park.
Because it was a roadless park
and because of his disability,
Roosevelt would never be able
to see Kings Canyon in person.
Instead, he contented himself
with following John Muir's
trail through the photographs
and words of Ansel Adams.
MAN AS ANSEL ADAMS: The dawn
wind in the high Sierra is not
just a passage of cool air
through forest conifers,
but within the labyrinth of
human consciousness becomes
a stirring of some world magic
of most delicate persuasion.
Here are forces familiar
with the eons of creation,
contemplating the flow of life
and of change through living
things, each of them tied to
cloud, stone, and sunlight.
We may make new discoveries
about ourselves.
COYOTE: In the fall of 1941,
Ickes decided Adams could be
of even greater assistance.
He put him on the Interior
Department's payroll at $22.22
a day and told him to bring
back photographs of all the
parks for prominent display
in the capital city.
Adams said it was one of the
best ideas ever to come out
of Washington and happily
packed up his station wagon to
set out on his assignment.
Off and on for the next
8 years, he would compile
thousands of images of the
national parks and visit every
one of them except, to his
great regret, the Everglades.
[Radio static]
ANNOUNCER: This bulletin
from the NBC Newsroom
here in New York.
SECOND ANNOUNCER:
We've just had a flash...
ANNOUNCER: Action
against Pearl Harbor defenses.
SECOND ANNOUNCER: saying that
a state of war exists
with the United States.
THIRD ANNOUNCER: That the
Japanese have attacked
the United States Naval Base.
SECOND ANNOUNCER: Now we
begin to see through things,
it's obvious that the--the,
uh, Imperial General's staff
has precipitated an attack
and now announces
that that attack is war.
COYOTE: But just a few months
after Adams began his travels,
the Japanese attacked Pearl
Harbor, and the United States
was thrust into
another World War.
Now Adams pursued his project
with even greater passion.
To those who questioned
whether his artistry could be
put to a better purpose
in wartime, he had
a simple reply.
"I believe my work," he wrote,
"relates most efficiently to
"what we are fighting for."
Like everything else in
American life, the national
parks now found themselves
subordinated to the all-out
effort to defeat Japan
and its ally Germany.
The CCC camps closed down as
the men who had been working
on trails and park buildings
became soldiers and shipped
out overseas.
Park budgets were cut to
a quarter of their
pre-war levels.
Just as in the First World War,
pressures mounted to open
them up to timber cutting,
mining, and grazing.
Harold Ickes did his best
do minimize the damage.
MAN AS ANSEL ADAMS: When
World War II began, there were
strong pressures in many
circles to close the national
parks for the duration with
the thought that no one needs
a vacation in wartime.
Ickes disagreed with this,
stating that in times
of national stress and sorrow
the people needed precisely
what the national
parks could offer.
Ansel Adams.
COYOTE: When Ickes informed
Roosevelt that a proposed
bombing range would
endanger the breeding grounds
of the rare trumpeter swan
that George Melendez Wright
had worked so hard to
preserve, the president dashed
off a quick note to
his Secretary of War
countermanding the decision.
"The verdict is for the
trumpeter swan and against
"the Army," Roosevelt wrote.
"The Army must find a
different nesting place."
In 1941, the year leading up to
America's entry into the war,
a record 21 million people had
visited the national parks.
The next year, the figure
dropped to 9 million, then to
6.8 million in 1943.
All across the system,
many park rangers changed
uniforms and went off to war.
"Poor, old National Park
Service is in a bad way,"
a now retired
Horace Albright wrote to his
successor after being informed
of all the cutbacks,
but the parks still
had a role to play.
At Mount Rainier, units
of what would become
the 10th Mountain Division were
taught how to survive in high
altitudes and cold weather.
War planners also realized
that national parks could
provide much needed rest
and recuperation
for battle-weary soldiers.
The Navy took over the swank
Ahwahnee Hotel in Yosemite
for a convalescence center.
Rest camps went up in Sequoia,
Carlsbad Caverns,
the Grand Canyon,
and Mount McKinley
National Park in Alaska was
transformed into an
army recreation camp.
Soldiers stationed in the
Aleutian Islands could fish,
hike, ski, skate, and relax.
In 1943, 1.6 million
soldiers found
momentary solace and enjoyment
in a national park,
1/4 of the total visitation.
That same year, Ansel Adams
interrupted his photographic
survey and went to the
Owens Valley of California
in the eastern shadow of
Mount Whitney to document
something entirely different.
After the surprise attack
on Pearl Harbor, President
Roosevelt signed an executive
order requiring all people
of Japanese descent living on
the West Coast, even those who
were United States citizens,
to be uprooted from their
homes and sent to
internment camps
for the duration of the war.
"We must prosecute this war
with all ruthless efficiency,"
Adams wrote after he had
photographed the Manzanar
Internment Camp, "but we must
be certain that, as the rights
"of the individual are the
most sacred elements of our
"society, we will not allow
passion, vengeance, hatred,
"and racial antagonism to cloud
the principles of universal
"justice and mercy."
WOMAN: Dear Husband, I'm
a little too much tired,
but I'm sure I can live
here all right.
Just imagine a mountain camp.
When the sky's clear,
we will see our holy
Mount Rainier, I suppose.
I will write you
again very soon.
Lovingly yours, Hanaye.
COYOTE: Because he had worked
for a Japanese company,
Iwao Matsushita was arrested
and taken away from his wife
in the first hours
after Pearl Harbor.
Hanaye was put in a temporary
detention center near Seattle,
where she tried her best
to boost the spirits of her
husband far away in
an internment camp
in western Montana.
WOMAN AS HANAYE MATSUSHITA:
Dear Husband, after severe
rain, the sky became clear,
and we saw Mount Rainier over
the hill yesterday
for the first time.
There will actually be a
day when you'll be released
and we'll be able
to rest peacefully.
Once in a while, I dream
about running around the base
of Mount Rainier.
Remember the times we hiked
through the mountain together?
It all seems like a dream.
MAN AS CHIURA OBATA: The sudden
burst of Pearl Harbor
was as if the Mother Earth on
which we stood was swept by
the terrific force of a
big wave of resentment
of the American people.
Our dignity and our
hopes were crushed.
COYOTE: Friends of Chiura Obata
had pleaded with the
federal government that the
artist posed no security
threat and even suggested that
he be taken instead to his
beloved Yosemite.
The request was denied.
Obata and his family were
forced to go to a camp
in Topaz, Utah.
To help keep his and his
fellow prisoners' minds off
what he called
"the intolerable sin" of their
incarceration, Obata opened
an art school at the camp
and continued his own
sketching and painting.
HILL: So here he was
basically with a community
of fellow Japanese.
"Yes, we are in this desert,
but don't just look
"at the dust and the ground,
don't just be depressed
"about what's happening.
"You can somehow lift
your spirits by looking
"at the mountains that
are surrounding us."
They were not the same
mountains that he had
experienced in the Sierras
of course, and yet,
he felt comforted.
He would use that word.
"I still feel comforted and
nurtured by great nature."
And he wanted other people
to understand this, as well.
COYOTE: One of his paintings,
"Moonlight Over Topaz,"
was given to the president's
wife, Eleanor Roosevelt,
in thanks for her speaking
out for fair treatment
of Japanese Americans.
Years later in remembrance
of his personal ordeal, Obata
would paint "Glorious Struggle,"
the image of a tree
in Yosemite's high Sierra,
whose own struggle to survive
seemed to give him strength
and hope in his darkest hour.
One subject he loved to
paint again and again
was the sequoia.
For him, they were
this great vertical
line that connected heaven and
earth, and for him, he saw
the life of a person in these
trees and that no matter the
storms and trials of life that
these trees survive with great
dignity and great strength.
MAN AS CHIURA OBATA: In such
times, I heard the gentle
but strong whisper of
the Sequoia gigantean.
"Hear me, you poor man.
"I've stood here more than
3,700 years in rain, snow,
"storm, and even mountain fire,
still keeping my thankful
"attitude strongly with nature.
"Do not cry, do not spend your
time and energy worrying.
"You have children following.
"Keep up your unity.
Come with me."
Chiura Obata.
COYOTE: In the midst of
the war, a letter arrived
at the White House for
President Roosevelt.
MAN: My dear Mr. President,
many years ago,
I purchased some
30,000 acres of land
in Jackson Hole, Wyoming,
confidently expecting
that the federal government
would gladly accept
the land as a gift to be added
to its national park system.
15 years have passed.
The government has not
accepted the property.
I have now determined to
dispose of the property,
selling it if necessary in
the market to any
satisfactory buyer.
Very sincerely,
John D. Rockefeller Jr.
COYOTE: The longest
festering fight in the history
of the parks was
about to erupt into
a full-scale battle.
Back in the 1920s,
Horace Albright had shown
Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Rockefeller Jr.
the flat, sage-brush- covered
plain called Jackson Hole
and explained to them his
dream that all of it,
the valley floor as well as
the mountains, would one
day be preserved, but when
Congress had created Grand
Teton National Park in 1929,
it left the valley alone and
set aside only the mountains.
Meanwhile, Rockefeller
continued anonymously buying
up ranches and homesteads in
the valley with the intention
of donating it all for the
park's expansion, but Wyoming
politicians, who had learned
of Rockefeller's scheme,
did everything they could to
thwart his plan, not wanting
Washington to tell them what
they could and could not do
with their land.
The state's sole congressman
even introduced a bill calling
for the complete abolition
of Grand Teton National Park
despite the fact that the
mountains were not part
of the dispute.
MAN AS HORACE ALBRIGHT:
I must confess I get pretty
discouraged at times in
trying to understand some
of the people out there.
It almost makes one weep,
not for one's self
because after all what
difference does it make to
an individual what happens
to Wyoming, but one weeps
for Wyoming itself.
Horace Albright.
COYOTE: Albright was a private
citizen but more determined
than ever to see
his dream fulfilled.
In 1943 with Congress still
unwilling to enlarge the park,
he and Rockefeller and
Harold Ickes decided that their
only hope lay in the president's
unique authority under
the Antiquities Act to create
a national monument.
Rockefeller's letter to
Roosevelt was meant to prod
the president into action.
It worked.
On March 15, 1943, Roosevelt
signed an executive order
establishing Jackson Hole
National Monument, placing
221,610 acres of federal land
on the eastern border of
Grand Teton National Park
under Park Service control.
In Wyoming, the response was a
declaration of political war.
The president, one senator
said, had committed
"a foul, sneaking,
Pearl Harbor blow."
A journalist wrote that
Roosevelt's action followed
the general lines of
Adolf Hitler's
seizure of Austria.
MAN: When this happened,
it was a big uproar,
lots of talk,
lots of talk, and the ranchers
were totally opposed, and
they thought their grazing
rights were being destroyed.
COYOTE: Wyoming's governor
threatened to use state police
against any National Park
official attempting to assume
authority in the new monument.
Some Forest Service employees
gutted their ranger stations
before turning them over to
the Park Service, and hoping
to provoke a confrontation and
draw attention to their cause,
a group of armed local
ranchers, led by the aging
movie star Wallace Beery,
defiantly herded 500 head
of cattle across the
monument without a permit.
MAN: I was born here in
Jackson Hole in 1912.
There was pretty strong
resentment about the manner
in which the monument had been
created, and we had rifles,
and we drove cattle across the
Gros Ventre River and across
the monument land, and
Wallace Beery was right
at the--right at the head.
ostensibly to shoot anybody
who might try to stop us.
No one tried to stop us,
but we did get
a lot of attention.
COYOTE: In Washington,
Wyoming's delegation pushed
through a bill abolishing the
national monument and turning
the land back to
the Forest Service.
Roosevelt vetoed it.
The state of Wyoming then
went to court, claiming that
Jackson Hole lacked the
objects of scientific or
historic interest necessary
for national monument status.
Postcards showing a ramshackle
outhouse were circulated
with a message saying,
"These are some
"of the historic
structures here.
"This is one known to have
been occupied several times
"by Horace M. Albright."
A federal court dismissed the
case, saying it was a dispute
between the executive and
legislative branches which
the judiciary would do well
to steer clear of.
In 1945, Roosevelt died
and World War II ended,
but the battle of
Jackson Hole roared on.
MAN AS HORACE ALBRIGHT:
Dealing with Wyoming is like
dealing with the Russians.
You never get anywhere
by trying to cooperate.
Horace Albright.
COYOTE: "This was a battle,"
the retired Albright said,
"I had to get into."
He lobbied his Republican
friends like former president
Herbert Hoover and marshaled a
campaign by major conservation
groups to rally their members
to tell Congress that
the American people also
had a stake in what
happened in Wyoming.
A study was published showing
that retail sales taxes
in Jackson Hole had doubled
and the region's overall
economy had been strengthened
by the boost in tourism,
but the local political
climate remained decidedly,
stubbornly antipark.
Finally in 1950 after it
became clear that the bitter
battle would never end in
unconditional surrender by
either side, a compromise
was worked out.
Teton County would be
reimbursed for lost property
taxes, existing grazing
rights were grandfathered in,
and the migratory elk herd
would be managed by both the
Park Service and the state,
which would be permitted to
oversee supervised hunts.
In return, the bulk of Jackson
Hole National Monument became
part of an enlarged
Grand Teton National Park,
now 3 times its original size.
Included in it was the 30,000
acres of private land
John D. Rockefeller Jr. had been
trying so hard to give away.
MURIE: So it's not
just the spectacular.
It's the foreground.
You have to have foregrounds
to wilderness, you have to
have the highlands and middle
lands and the lowlands,
and a huge piece of northern
Jackson Hole is saved from
strip malls, saved from
what happened to--to--down
in the town of Jackson.
COYOTE: Tucked away in the
compromise that finally ended
the battle of Jackson Hole was
another concession:
"According to this provision,
future United States presidents
"are barred from ever again
using executive action to
"establish new
national monuments
"in the state of Wyoming except
"by the express permission
of Congress."
Wyoming, the state with the
distinction of having the
world's first national park,
Yellowstone, and the first
national monument,
Devil's Tower, now had another
distinction--the only state
where the Antiquities Act
is null and void.
HANSEN: I was one who was very
critical of the Rockefellers
and did all I was able to do
to try to thwart their plans,
and I'm grateful now that I
wasn't successful because I
have to appreciate as everyone
else does the uniqueness
and the beauty of this area.
Thank God for
the Rockefellers.
I've told them on more than
one occasion that I'm glad
I lost that fight.
WOMAN: For all the
bureaucracy, for all the red
tape, for all the arguments
about public policy,
our national parks are first
and foremost places of love,
and I think each American can
look into their own hearts
and tell you, "This is my
national park," and it might
be the Great Smokys,
it might be Yosemite.
For our family,
it's Grand Teton.
This is the range
of our memory.
My great-grandfather brought
my grandfather, who brought
my father, who brought
us as children.
It's the last place my
mother came before she died.
It's also the last place my
brother took his family before
he succumbed to lymphoma.
I'll never forget.
We were at the Murie Ranch,
and Steve and Ann
and the girls were walking
toward the Snake River.
It was pink light, alpenglow,
and Steve stopped,
and you could see the
reflections of the Tetons
in one of the pools, and he
turned to Ann and the girls,
and he said,
"Mark this moment."
And then 5 elks went across
the Snake River, and I watched
this family of 5 return.
These are the stories that
allow us to go home and face
not only our lives
but even our deaths.
That's the power of these
remembered landscapes.
DUNCAN: The Declaration of
Independence began with this
incredible statement that
all men, all human beings
are created equal.
We've been chasing that ideal,
those words for the rest
of our history, often too
slowly, never quite reaching
it even yet, but that's the
statement that we're chasing.
The national park idea,
which is the best idea we had
after we became a nation,
didn't start that way
with a bold statement,
grand ideals that we're
trying to chase.
It began sort of
experimentally,
improvisationally, and it's
only as we've moved through
time that we have added this
notion of what a park is
and what's allowed in it and
what's not allowed in it,
what we should be drawing
from it, but like the notion
of freedom, we've always been
arguing over it, we've always
been trying to grapple with
its meaning, and always trying
to on the one hand remain true
to the ideal but leaving it up
to each succeeding generation
to either push it a little bit
farther or broaden
it a little bit more.
COYOTE: In the midst
of Franklin Roosevelt's
presidency, the world renowned
contralto Marian Anderson had
been denied the
opportunity to perform in
Constitution Hall,
the 4,000-seat auditorium
controlled by the Daughters
of the American Revolution,
because of the
color of her skin.
At the urging of
Eleanor Roosevelt, Harold Ickes,
who had once been the head of
the NAACP in Chicago, quickly
issued Anderson permission to
sing at a different venue,
the Lincoln Memorial,
a recent addition
to the national park system.
The concert was free
and drew a crowd of 75,000
of all races and creeds.
HAROLD ICKES: Genius, genius
draws no color line, and so it
is fitting that
Marian Anderson should raise her
voice in tribute
to the noble Lincoln,
whom mankind will ever honor.
Miss Marian Anderson.
COYOTE: After being introduced
by Ickes, Anderson stepped to
the microphone and
began her program.
My country, 'tis of thee
Sweet land of liberty
Of thee we sing
Land where my fathers died
Land of our pilgrims' pride
From every mountainside
Let freedom ring
Ave Maria
ICKES: In this great
auditorium under the sky,
all of us are free.
When God gave us this
wonderful outdoors and the sun
and the moon and the stars,
he made no distinction of race
or creed or color.
[Anderson continues
singing "Ave Maria"]
POPE: You start out with
places that were created
in the late 19th Century
because nobody wanted them,
like Yellowstone.
You go through places like
Hetch Hetchy, which were
sacrificed because
somebody did want them.
You go to the Olympic
Peninsula, and the guys who
wanted to cut the logs lose.
You go to Jackson Hole,
and the state of Wyoming
desperately fights the
creation of Grand Tetons
and then puts it on its
license plates, and finally,
you end up with history.
So what--what, a European
would ask, does all this have
in common, and I think what it
all has in common is these are
the places where Americans
encounter who they
are and are home.
These are the places that
make this continent our home.
This is what enables Americans
to inhabit this whole place,
where after all very few of
us originally came from.
ANDERSON: Ave Maria
[Cheering and applause]